{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;\f4\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f5\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
\f6\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f7\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue233;\red251\green2\blue7;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red35\green31\blue32;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c93333;\cssrgb\c100000\c14913\c0;
\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c100000;\csgenericrgb\c13725\c12157\c12549;\csgenericrgb\c100000\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c1680\c19835\c100000;\csgray\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww17680\viewh13680\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BODY SIZE AND SWIMMING PERFORMANCE
\f1 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0\fs24 \cf2 \'93The n\ul egative allometry of metabolic rate\ulnone , whereby larger animals exhibit lower mass-specific rates of metabolism, confers a suite of physiological and ecological benefits at greater body sizes.\'94 J. A. Goldbogen, 2018 (Comment in PNAS)
\f0\b\fs28 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0\fs24 \cf2 These advantages include a low cost of transport ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.pnas.org/content/115/16/3995#ref-4"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul \ulc3 4}}): \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 	CITE: 1.	\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Williams TM 
\f3\i (1999) The evolution of cost efficient swimming in marine mammals: Limits to energetic optimization. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 354:193\'96201.
\f2\i0 \
\

\f0\b\fs28 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Williams et al., 2017\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0\fs24 \cf2 \'93energetic cost of swimming increases exponentially when moving at progressively higher speeds attributed to the exponential rise in hydrodynamic drag t
\f0\b\fs28 \

\f2\b0\fs24 \'93Not surprising that many species of marine mammal regardless of size routinely swim at comparatively slow preferred speeds (averaging <1.5\'962.5
\f4 \uc0\u8197 
\f2 m
\f4 \uc0\u8197 
\f2 s
\fs20 \super \uc0\u8722 1
\fs24 \nosupersub ) that promote an economy of movement\'93
\f0\b\fs28 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\
\
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BODY SHAPE AND SWIMMING PERFORMANCE
\f1 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \
Fish, 2004
\f2\b0 \
In aquatic animals, the humerus is short to increase mechanical advantage (Fish, 2004).\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Humpback wales have the longest flippers of any cetaceans (from 25 - 33% of body length)\
\
\'93The AR of biological control surfaces is calculated as the square of the span divided by the planar area\'94\
\
\'93The cross-sectional shape of flippers have similarities with the engineered foil sections\'94.\
\'93at mid span, biological control surfaces have thicknesses between 15-24% of the chord length, with the maximum thickness happening at about 24-36% in average\'94\
\'93maximum thicknesses occur closer to the root\'94\
\
\'93Camber in penguins increases lift production\'94\
\
\'93Sweep form and a root chord created than the chord at the tips reduce induced drag\'94\
\
\'93Sweep and taper concentrate the surface area towards the trailing edge, affecting the pitching equilibrium\'94\
\
In general, cetaceans possess a morphological design similar to that found in the arrow model. \
Anterior CG, control surfaces concentrated posterios to CG, \
\
\
How 
\f1\b size can influence thrust
\f5\b0  (lift) production??\
\'93increase in the max L/D with increasing size is achieved by increasing the span of the control surface more rapidly than the square root of the planar area.\'94 \
\cf4 If the change is isometric, AR should not increase!!\cf0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Endothermy/body size and diving abilities.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Comment by Mike\
\'93in physiological terms, ectotherms can remain submerged underwater for longer than endotherms because of their lower oxygen demand; indeed they can dive for up to ten times as long as an endotherm of similar\'a0
\f5 body
\f2 \'a0mass, reflecting the order-of-magnitude difference in metabolic rates (Verberk et al., 2020). This provides evidence for a selective advantage in becoming ectothermic to enable long submersion times. Further, dive duration is proportional to\'a0
\f5 body
\f2 \'a0
\f5 size
\f2 , but the\'a0
\f5 body
\f2 \'a0mass-dive duration relationship is steeper for endotherms than for ectotherms, which explains why the largest deep-divers today are endotherms (whales) and this was likely true also in the Mesozoic (ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, mosasaurs).
\f5 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
Benson & Buttler 2011\
They make 2 groups of locomotion: \
\
Shallow waters / Axial undulation (1)\
All MMreptiles with plesiopedal limbs swam by axial undulation: thalattosaurs, basal mosasauroids, most basal sauropterygians. \
\
\cf4 It is hard to tell from my morphospace because of the great overlap.  \
Certainly not pistosauroids!\
Only a few could be potential paddler/ rowers within basal sauropterygians: 46, 48  27, 14, 9, 46: Two nothosauroids: Neusticosaurus (a nothosauroid), Keichosaurus, Diandongosaurus (a basal  and a basal pistosauroid (Wangosaurus). The derived pistosaur already an underwater flier (perhaps only bipedal?).\
MUY INTERESANTE: DIANDONGOSAURUS is sometimes plotted at the base of the clade leading to Pistosaurs!\
\
Another very interesting thing: PISTOSAUROIDS evolved really early: Corosaurus is from Early Jurassic\
\
\
\cf0 \
Many forms with hydro pedal limbs: basal ichthyosaurs, most derived mosasaurs, thalattosuchians.\
\
Open ocean / Caudally-driven or Appendicular (2) \
Plesiosaurs, turtles, mosasaurs. Plotosaurus and parvipelvian ichthyosaurs.\
\
\cf4 Many mosasaurs are misclassified as more similar to crocodilians, but plot closer to basal parvipelvian ichthyosaur. Only Halisaurus and Clidastes plot close to basal ichthyosaurs, but Tylosaurus, Mosasaurus, Plotosaurus and Platecarpus overlap the area of basal parvipelvians, which means they were further into the evolutionary path of axial specialisation, more towards the the sub-carangiform end of the undulatory continuum.\
\
Add to discussion: why basal ichthyosaurs and hupehsuchians! plot so far from the \'93lump\'94?  Look in my graphs: what is so different in them?\
Do some plots?\cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f6\b \cf2 Read Benson 2011 (paper about turtles)
\f7\b0  \
where bone histology and forelimb proportions are used to infer ecology.
\f5 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Botton-Divet:
\f5\b0  Swimming and running. There is convergence in long bone morphology among semiaquatic mustelids. 3D GM of humerus, radius, ulna, fem, tip, fibula of 10 species of lutrinae and mustelids.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Walker et al., 2013
\f2\b0 \
In cora-reef fishes:\
\
\'93For body-caudal-fin swimmers, we found a non-linear relationship between fineness and 
\f3\i U\sub max
\f2\i0 \nosupersub \'94\
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0075422\
\
\
\'93Our results suggest that the widespread hypothesis that a more optimal fineness increases endurance-swimming performance via reduced drag should be limited to fishes that swim with rigid bodies\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Bardet et al, 2014\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf0 \
\'93The earliest ichthyosaurs are already diversified and geographically dispersed, 
\f7 suggesting a radiation very early in the Triassic or even deeper in time
\f5 \'94 \cf4 This is consistent with them plotting far from the lump. They should not be lumped with basal Sauropterygians, thalattosaurs, thalattosuchians, because they were doing something else.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7 \cf0 \'93Late Triassic is often regarded as the \'91golden age\'92 of ichthyosaurs, with the presence of\
numerous taxa exhibiting a wide variety of body plans and feeding ecologies (\cf5 Sander et al., 2011; Thorne et al., 2011\cf0 ).\'94
\f5 \cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 I don\'92t see that\'85re-do graph?\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7 \cf0 \'93History repeated during the middle Toarcian\'96Bajocian interval, when all ichthyosaurs except thunnosaurianswent extinct, greatly reducing the\
diversity and disparity of the group.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 That is why I don\'92t have any in this time pediod.
\f5 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7 \cf0 \'93Ophthalmosaurids then rapidly radiated and dispersed, reaching a global distribution and a high taxonomic diversity by the Late Jurassic (\cf5 Druckenmiller et al., 2012\cf0 ).\'94\
\
\'93recent data indicate an extensive survival of ichthyosaurs across the Jurassic\'96Cretaceous boundary and a high diversity during the Early Cretaceous\'94 \cf4 Can\'92t confirm this- lack of data.
\f5 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Ando et al, 2016.
\f5\b0  Thoracic strength index. Fully aquatic mammals (i.e. cetaceans) have weak ribs that would collapse under its weight on land.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bever and Norell, 2017\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf6 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Recovery of Vadasaurus as the sister taxon to Pleurosauridae establishes it as a valuable window into the evolutionary origins of the pleurosaurs and their ecological transition from land to water.\
\
Pleurosauridae, a small radiation of rhynchocephalians representing the oldest marine invasion of crown-clade Lepidosauria.\
\
Discussion: This includes the evolution of the quick, snapping bite used by many aquatic vertebrates (characters ix and x)
\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f2\b0 \cf6 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 compelling argument that this taxon, if not fully aquatic, was spending considerable time in the water.
\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\
Hocking et al., 2017 (With Felix Marx)\
\'93
\f2\b0\fs24 feeding strategies of living aquatic mammals form an evolutionary sequence that recalls the land-to-water transition of their ancestors\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 behavioural feeding repertoire in mammals is: raptorial, suction and filter feeding (some also grip and tear, like Orca)
\f0\b\fs28 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Krahl et al, 2018
\f2\b0 \
\
\
\'93extensors (except for m. tractor radii) of Cheloniidae are placed distally\
, close to the elbow joint capsule.\'94 \
\'93The humerus in cheloniids is distally expanded\'94\
\
In turtles The flipper blade evolved by elongation of the phalanges of digit II,\
III, and IV
\f5 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 This I can leave for the discussion in chapter 5\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf7 How do Polycotilids compare in size with the pliosaurids and ichthyos that they potentially \'93replaced\'94? They are smaller (see distribution of trunk sizes. So, it is unlikely that they replaced them??\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 MORPHOSPACE RESEARCH\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf0 \
From Stubbs & Benton, 2016.\
Triassic: explosion of diversity (\'93Most marine reptiles lineages disappeared at the End of the Triassic.\'94 and trophic ecology (\cf4 but not body plan\cf0 )\
Jurassic and Cretaceous: \'93secondary radiations\'94 (most notoriously plesiosaurs and ichthyosaurs). \cf4 These keep expanding the locomotory morphospace, although the trophic ecology shrinks\cf0  \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Stubbs & Benton, 2016.
\f5\b0 \
Using morphospace, diversity and phylogenetic comparative methods they show that \'93Middle-Late Triassic was a period of exceptional phenotypic diversification in MMR\'94 (in trophic ecology)\
\
\'93The MMR explored the greatest breath of (trophic) functional morphospace in the first 10-20 Mya. Triassic was also witnessed the disparity of skull sizes. \
Full range of potential forms realised by one clade or another\'94 \cf4 Contrast this with disparity in body plan / locomotion. Trophic function exploded earlier, while bodies kept conservative for longer? MMR only reached their full potential of body and locomotory disparity during the Jurassic and Cretaceous (instead Middle-Late Triassic in trophic ecology)\cf0 \
\
They suggest that the Mesozoic Marine revolution (Vermej, 1977) -whose start is usually placed in the Jurassic- may have started earlier (in the Triassic) and might even be a consequence of the PTME. \cf4 Perhaps a two-part event, and the radiation of large-bodied pelagic forms was the second part\cf0 \
\
There is also a late burst of trophic diversification in the Late Cretaceous.\cf4  Not too far from what happened in body plan. It seems that disparity was peak in the Early Cretaceous and it shrunk a bit with the extinction of ichthyosaurs. By Late Cretaceous it has recovered thanks to the diversifying mosasaurs and turtles (which also contribute to a great deal of trophic disparity). Mosasaurs occupied niches left vacant by ichthyos.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 They don\'92t see a support for a reduction of ecomorphological disparity before the end of the Cretaceous \cf4 and neither do we. End Cretaceous extinction happened in a time of high expansive disparity.\
\
Trophic disparity seems to be at pair with the diversity of shallow / pelagic marine taxa. F.example: \cf2 Early Jurassic and Early Cretaceous, with low diversity of shallow marine have also very low trophic disparity (during or after major regression events)\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 This major regression (end Triassic) doesn\'92t affect at all locomotory disparity in contrast to what happens to trophic disparity. It only stays the same. There is indeed a reduction in the area occupied by the shallow marine (drag based swimming) forms, but this is balanced out by the expansion of pelagic groups, which survive and radiate. \
The greatest increase in body size disparity is observed from the Middle Jurassic to reach a peak in the Early Cretaceous.\
Early Cretaceous is the time of max locomotory and body size disparity. It would be even slightly larger if we could have included thalattosuchians in the Early Cretaceous (unfortunately there are no good enough fossils).\
\
Largest sizes are maximum in the Middi-Late Triassic and the Late Cretaceous: something to do with productivity of the Seas?\
Maximum sizes seems to be affected by the End Triassic (extinction of giant taxa), but not by the Early Cretaceous regression. Is this an indirect effect on productivity? or totally non-related? \
\
\
\cf0 \'93This study provides tentative evidence that major patterns of morphological evolution in MMR were driven by changing physical environmental conditions.\'94\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Reeves 2020
\f5\b0 \
They use ecospace modelling / ecologically functional categories for exploring macroevolutionary patterns in MMtetrapods (includes amphibians and birds!) \cf4 372\cf0  \cf4 taxa!\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul \ulc0 Body size\ulnone : total length\
\ul Habitat\ulnone : shallow water-open ocean (as in Benson and Buttler, 2011; \cf4 who use \'93locomotor inferences\'94 for this classification\cf0 ) \'97\'97> question: can shallow water be distinguished from \
\ul Aquatic adaptation:\ulnone  Plesiopedal / hydropedal limbs (according to Benson & Butler, 2011)\
\ul Feeding strategy:\ulnone  pursuit-ambush-foraging (based on morphotype by Massare 1994)\
\ul Diet: \ulnone herbivorous-carnivorous\
\ul Food location:\ulnone  pelagic, benthic, sessile\
\ul Feeding guilds:\ulnone  Filter, crush-cut, lunge\'85 (tooth morphology)\
\ul Specialist or generalist feeding:\ulnone  based on homodont/heterodont \
\ul Armour\
\ulnone \
Clusters: \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 Cluster 
\f5 1) 
\f2 pursuit carnivores that hunted pelagic prey in deep ocean environments and had hydropedal limbs: \cf8 derived ichthyosaurs, a small number of pliosaurs and the mosasaur 
\f3\i Plotosaurus
\f2\i0  \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Cluster 2) almost as cluster 1 but instead ambush predators.\cf8  Plesiosaurian sauropterygians and a few ichthyosaurs \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 Cluster 
\f5 3) 
\f2 ambush carnivores that fed on pelagic prey and had hydropedal limbs, but this time in shallow water environments. Small and large (up to 15 m!) forms. \cf8 Triassic ichthyosaurs, most mosasaurs and thalattosuchian crocodylomorphs \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf8 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Cluster 4) diverse assemblage of shallow water, ambush, pelagic feeders, but which retained plesiopedal limbs.\cf8  greater proportion of smaller forms. basal ichthyosauromorphs and hupehsuchians, teleosaurid and pholidosaurid crocodylomorphs, hesperornithiform birds, Triassic eosauropterygians (nothosaurs and pachypleurosaurus), some basal mosasaurs, all lizards and snakes, thalattosaurs and temnospondyls \
Lots of taxa in this cluster during the Triassic.\
During Triassic ichthyosaurs move from Cluster 4 to cluster 1.\
\
\cf0 Cluster 5) unarmoured, partially armoured and fully armoured taxa with plesiopedal limbs that existed in shallow water environments. foragers that fed on benthic prey and belonged to the crush or filter guilds and often had heterodont dentition.\cf8  placodont sauropterygians, enigmatic taxa such as the herbivore 
\f3\i Atopodentatus 
\f2\i0 and
\f3\i  Paludidraco
\f2\i0 , and some turtles \
\cf0 \
Cluster 6) Armoured, \cf7 edentulous foragers with \cf0 hydropedal limbs. This cluster includes both shallow and deep ocean forms that fed on either pelagic or benthic prey, and both carnivores and herbivores.
\f5 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
Ecospace trends through time:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 \'93The overall bounds of ecospace realized within the Triassic are not substantially expanded for the remainder of the Mesozoic\'94\cf4  but it seems to me the largest ecospace occupation is realised in the Cretaceous!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Contraction at the beginning of Jurassic:\cf4  To be expected because their morphospace has a large diet component. They confirm the large effect of marine recession and the evolutionary bottleneck in aquatic reptiles.  Do I confirm this if I use narrower time bins?\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 CHANGE IN OCEANIC ECOSYSTEMS THROUGHOUT THE MESOZOIC\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Takashima et al., 2006. Greenhouse world and the Mesozoic Ocean\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf6 \'93During the Cenomanian-Turonian (C/T) boundary OAE 2, for example, anoxic environments expanded from the photic zone (Damst\'e9 and K\'f6ster, 1998; Pancost et al., 2004) to greater than 3500-m depth in the Atlantic Ocean (Thurow et al., 1992), resulting in about 20 percent of marine organisms becoming extinct in various habitats within an interval of less than one million years (Figure 1F).\'94
\f1\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
Pearce et al., 2009\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93A marine productivity collapse in the latest Cenomanian is evidenced by the falling absolute and relative abundance of peridinioid dinocysts, believed to be the product of heterotrophic dinoflagellates\'94 (\'85) \'93increase in water depth caused by the latest Cenomanian transgression resulted in less eutrophic waters in epicontinental seas\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\
\
Benson & Buttler, 2011
\f5\b0 \
They find a strong negative correlation between non-marine area and shallow marine taxa. \'97> Greater continental flooding elevates the habitable area for shallow water organisms\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 They classify their taxa into 2 quite generic categories: shallow water / open ocean, using anatomical general morphotype information from Massare, Motani, etc etc- Too binary.\
\cf0 \
Also, shallow water should opose deep water. How do we define shallow marine and open ocean?\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"The depositional system that exist between the landward influence of the marine processes and the seaward influence of continental, mainly fluvial (river) processes\'94\
Mainly affected by \'93waves and storms, tidal currents and river-derived flows\'94\
Siddiqui et al 2017.
\f5 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\cf4 My morphospace shows some parallels with the shallow marine - pelagic division  used by Benson and Butler, 2011. \
Thalattosuchians were classified as shallow marine. Their extinction is associated with the descent (REGRESION) of sea levels at the beginning of the Cretaceous?\
\
IT IS THE SHALLOW-MARINE TAXA THE ONES THAT DRIVE THE TROPHIC DISPARITY AND THE DIVERSIFICATION OF PELAGIC FORMS THAT DRIVES THE BODY PLAN DISPARITY?\
However the Cretaceous us a time where both are high\
Transgression-regression of the sea levels also seems to influence the locomotory disparity in that they both go up almost continuously trough time, but we don\'92t find much evidence that this is affected by end Triassic or End Jurassic regressions. \
Mention that I might not have enough resolution to visualise it: According to Reeves, during 19Mya there was a contraction (before the thalattosuchians evolved). Don\'92t forget that I don\'92t have turtles in the Early Jurassic\'85were Triassic turtles aquatic for sure?\
\
Late Jurassic recession event does seem to impact on maximum size.\
\
This data supports differential evolutionary dynamics in shallow marine and open ocean taxa (or a differential effect of external factors).\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7\fs18 \cf0 Benson et al. (2010): a progressive increase in diversity from the Early Cretaceous to a Santonian (middle Late Cretaceous)
\f5\fs28 \cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\cf0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Chen and Benton, 2012
\f5\b0 \
Stable complex ecosystems didn\'92t re-emerge until Mid-Triassic (8-9 Myr after PTM)\
\
It has been suggested that the first Marine faunas established after the recovery were imbalanced ??\
\
after PTM modern oceanic structures are stablished.\
\
Current model for PTME is that it got triggered by Siberian traps\'97> acid rain\'97\'97> killing plants and massive erosion on land plus ocean acidification and anoxia in the oceans, plus increased sedimentation and perhaps release of methane and greenhouse gasses from deep sea.\
At the beginning of Triassic: coral gap in the shallow seas and coal gap in land.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul New groups in the sea: marine reptiles\ulnone  and the decapod crustaceans\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 groups that were already present, but were minor components of ecosystems, such as bivalves, gastropods, malacostracans (crabs and lobsters), echinoids (sea urchins), scleractinian corals and bony fishes, took their places. 
\f5 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Bardet et al., 2014 \

\f5\b0 Marine reptiles biogeography/tectonics. She has studied the genera geographical distributions of all the major taxa of marine reptiles in the Mesozoic!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Benson & Druckenmiller (2014)\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 found a substantial decline in plesiosaurian morphological disparity during the Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous. \cf7 We see the same.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl-280\slleading40\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Read Triassic biotic recovery (Scheyer) and compare it with my data!!!
\f5\b0 \
For the discussion\
\
\
How is it different the biogeographic distribution of  sauropterygia to that of ichthyosaurs?\
\
\
\

\f1\b Tennant 2017 for Late-Jurassic to Early Cretaceous transition.
\f5\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 \
\'93time of environmental upheaval and cataclysmic events\'94\
\'93There was a combination of short-term catastrophic events, large-scale tectonic processes\
and environmental perturbations\'94\
\
\'93In the marine realm, extinctions were focused on low-latitude, shallow marine shelf-dwelling faunas, corresponding to a significant eustatic sea-level fall in the latest Jurassic\'94\
\'93More mobile and ecologically plastic marine groups, such as ichthyosaurs, survived the boundary relatively unscathed.\'94\
High extinction and turnover in macropredaceous groups (plesiosaurs)\
Extinction of animals living in marine and terrestrial ecosystems: crocodylomorphs\
\
* the continental (marine) shelf can vary in depth but usually is shallower than 100m.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
from wiki: Shelf seas refer to the ocean waters on the continental shelf. Their motion is controlled by the combined influences of the tides wind-forcing and brackish water formed from river inflows. High productivity areas.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 seems that ichthyosaurs passed through the J/K boundary relatively unscathed (Fischer 
\f7 et al.
\f2 , 2012, 2013
\f7 a
\f2 ).\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Foffa, Young and Brussatte, 2018\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf2 Corallian gap: lack of fossils for most of the Oxfordian period.
\f7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \'93there is a severe reduction in observed marine reptile diversity during the Oxfordian, with several Callovian taxa well known from the OCF not persisting into the Corallian strata, including small-to-mid-sized pliosaurids and longirostrine teleosaurids.\'94\
\
\'93faunal turnover between the OCF and KCF may have been driven by environmental perturbations during the Oxfordian, which selectively removed small bodied pliosaurids and longirostrine teleosaurids from the Jurassic Sub-Boreal Seaway\'94 \
Strong fluctuations in sea water depth and temperature\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf4 I don\'92t think I have enough resolution to see this effect.\
However I can discuss the fact that small bodied plesiosaurs seem to have gone selectively extinct during the Oxfordian 
\f7 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \'93fossil record of Jurassic marine tetrapods is rich, but is often based on a relatively small number of (particularly European) Lagerst\'e4tten,\'94\
\
The Oxfordian: 	1) decline of pliosaurid taxic and morphological diversity; \
			2) shift thalattosuchian metriorhynchine piscivorous-dominated fauna 					(numerically but not taxonomically) \'97\'97>  hypercarnivorous-dominated 				geosaurine fauna;\
			3) radiation of platypterygiine ichthyosaurs
\f7 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f5 \cf2 \
Lack of vertebrate fossils in the Oxfordian is considered a true signal, not a sampling artefact (Benton & Spencer, 1995; Foffa et al, 2018)\
\
See tree \

\f1\b \cb9 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Fortyny & Steyer, 2019
\f5\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
About Temnospondyl\
\'93Early\'96Middle Triassic because they quickly occupied empty ecological niches related to both \ul fresh- and brackish-waters.\ulnone  \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \cb1 with adult body sizes up to 5 m (e.g. Mastodonsaurus). Some giants persisted during the Late Triassic
\f5 \cb9 \

\f2 \cb1 they may have encountered competition with the flourishing neosuchian crocodylomorphs in non-marine ecosystems (Fortuny et al. 2016)\'94\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f7 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 \ul \ulc2 SAUROPTERYGIA\ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Bardet and Angst, 2016
\f2\b0 \
Brachauchenius lucasi was previously known only from several Cenomanian\'96Turonian outcrops from the Western Interior Seaway of North America (Williston,\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf5 1907\cf0 ; Carpenter, \cf5 1996\cf0 ; Hampe, \cf5 2005\cf0 ; Liggett et al. \cf5 2005\cf0 ; Albright III, Gillette & Titus, \cf5 2007a\cf0 ) and from upper Barremian deposits of northern South America\
(Colombia) (Hampe, \cf5 2005\cf0 ).\
\
Araujo & Correa, 2015\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7\fs20 \cf0 There was a functional specialization in the types of movement operated for swimming materialized by a physical specialization of particular muscle groups.
\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 \ul ICHTHYOSAURS\ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Kolb&Sander, 2009.
\f5\b0 \
Platypterygius can reach lengths of up to 9 m. The specimen I have represented is probably a subadult, but is the best there is\'85\
Probably the body sizes are not so well represented with just trunks. \
Perhaps I can work out a formula?\
They say only 4 valid genera persist through the Cretaceous: Caypullisaurus, Brachypterygius, Maiaspondylus and Platypterygius. The most complete was P. platydactylus (broili, 1907) , also the type species.\
but was lost! in WWII. \

\f1\b Thorne (2011)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf2 Ichthyosaurs experience a evolutionary bottleneck from Triassic to Jurassic. Diversity recovers but Disparity (Check whole body skeletal characters. \
) gets reduced and never gets to pre-Jurassic levels \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Contrary to Thorne\'92s observation, In my morphospace it seems that there is not a radical reduction of locomotory morphospace in ichthyosaurs (after Late Triassic). Although I can\'92t measure it due to the small sample size for each time-bin.\
In ichthyosaurs, the greatest morphospace occupation happens in Triassic and then it contracts. Triassic > Jurassic > Cretaceous\
Conversely, in sauropterygians the trend is oposite: Triassic < Jurassic < Cretaceous\
 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs30 \cf2 Motani, 2014 (cartorhynchus)\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \'93Thedistance between the zeugopodium and metapodium is unusually large, suggesting the presence of cartilaginous centralia\'94 \'97> quite a long carpal gap
\f5 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf4 It is an edentulous taxon, suction feeding suggested.\
Motani noticed the unusual large size of their limbs and the carpal gap, and suggested that this might have difficulted motion in water, but he suggested a possible amphibian lifestyle, due to it potentially being able to bended the flippers and move in land like turtles.\cf2 \
\
Jiang 2016 (sclerocormus)\
\cf4 Also large carpal gap, but better ossified. Short and heavily built torso. More representatives of the earliest ichyhyosauromophs will help understanding of the first steps in the aquatic adaptation of this group.\cf2 \
\
mortgage team\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Maxwell 2015.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf2 Something about ichthyosaurs with ecospace modelling?\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 Moon 2017:
\f5\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Several genera are not monophyletic: Brachypterygius, Leptonectes, Mixosaurus, Ophthalmosaurus, Paraophthalmosaurus, Phalarodon, Platypterygius, Stenopterygius, Temnodontosaurus and Undorosaurus.\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f7 \cf2 \ul \

\f6\b \
TURTLES
\f7\b0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 There is evidence that the most basal Triassic turtle with no plastron or carapace was already aquatic: \'93The occurrence of Eorhynchochelys in marine sediments and the failure of the astragalus and calcaneum to fuse in an adult are features consistent with aquatic habits.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Sample and representation of groups during the Late Jurassic and Early Triassic. \
There were various turtles during the Late Jurassic, but the Oxfordian is devoid of complete fossils. \
Sichuanchelyds, Platychelyds, Xijiangchelydae and Synemydae. \
\
Also! Unfortunately I couldn\'92t get hold of the Richmond pliosaur and the Callawayasaurus\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Brimacombe, A.J. (2015) A new dimension on the hydrodynamics of ichthyosaurs. Unpublished MSc thesis, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Heighton, B. (2019) Convergence and disparity in aquatic tetrapods: Revelations from morphospace. Unpublished MSc thesis, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\
\

\f0\b \cf2 \ul THALATTOSUCHIA
\f2\b0 \cf4 \ulnone \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl360\slmult1\sa200\partightenfactor0
\cf4 I only have Thalattosuchians in record during the Jurassic, but they seem to have extended also in the Early Cretaceous according to Tennant, 2017!\cf0  But in Foffa et al, 2018. They only seem to mostly stop in Late Jurassic. Only Machimosaurus seems to go into the Cretaceous..(that\'92s for the boreal sea..)\
In wikipedia and fossilworks, Dakosaurus extends to 112Mya (but Dakosaurus maximus not).\
It seems correct. Dakosaurus is found in the lower Cretaceous. But it is Dakosaurus andiniensis. Also Cricosaurus araucanensis (only known from a partial skull) and Geosaurus giganteous  according to Stubbs and Benton, 2016 (they use G.giganteous) . However, Geosaurus is polyphyletic and should not be used. G.giganteus nests deeply within Dakosaurus, other \'93species\'94 of Geosaurus are instead Enaliosuchus and Cricosaurus.. Young and Andrade, 2009).\
\
An incomplete skeleton discovered from an unnamed Lower Cretaceous (early Hauterivian in age) formation in De\'b4partement du Var, Provence-Alpes-Co\'88 te d\'92Azur, France was referred to as Dacosaurus maximus var. gracilis (sic) [40].\
\

\f0\b \ul THALATTOSAURIA\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f7\b0 \cf0 \ulnone the Askeptosauroidea were near-surface generalist predators whereas Thalattosauroidea adapted toward a pelagic life\
and showed an increasing heterodonty to occupy a larger number of palaeoecological guilds. \
\cf4 Unfortunately 
\f2 I lack Thalattosauroids (the ones supposedly more pelagic) in my sample except for Clarazia!! Don\'92t see major patterns.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul TREMATOSAURIA\ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f5\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf2 Capitosauria dominated the freshwater ponds, lakes and rivers of the Triassic.
\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Trematosauroidea 
\f2\b0 were found in brackish, freshwater environments. Only a family of them, the Trematosauridae, were adapted to marine life.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\sl360\slmult1\sa200\qj\partightenfactor0

\fs18 \cf0 Ichthyosaurs from the \'91basal grade\'92 are highlighted in yellow; the \'91intermediate grade\'92 in green and the \'91fish-shaped ichthyosaurs\'92 in blue. The bottlenose dolphin 
\f3\i Tursiops
\f2\i0  is highlighted in red. (G) Two-dimensional plots of flow velocity magnitude (Re = 5 \'d7 10\super 6\nosupersub  (inlet velocity of 5 ms\super \uc0\u8722 1\nosupersub ).\
\
\
\
TOYOTA PROBOX 2004\
AUTOMATICO STATION WAGON\
GASOLINA\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf0 \
\
it.r.sion\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl-280\slleading40\partightenfactor0

\f7 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.t.r\'85..\
\
\'85..\
\
\
.a\'85..a\
\
\
..n.m.\
\
\
Oxfordcito_0000\
\
I guess Tanja Stadler and before, Bininda Emonds used lineages-through-time plots, and that will not detect what\'92s going on at KPg\
\
\
\
Join Zoom Meeting\
https://us04web.zoom.us/j/73251591787?pwd=VHRhd3lSUi8rR01KQUZDMkVUOWs0Zz09\
\
Meeting ID: 732 5159 1787\
Passcode: 8vErQv\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}